feat: introduce product type (#13554)
shopware/platform: adr/2025-11-14-introduce-product-type-and-deprecate-states.md

# Introduce Product Type And Deprecate Product States

## Context

Currently, the product.states field has various issues:

* Not clear semantics:
  - It mixes multiple responsibilities (download/physical markers, per-row flags).
  - A product never changes from digital to physical or vice versa, but the field is updated on every save even if no relevant changes were made. Hence, the term "states" is ambiguous and does not clearly convey the purpose of the field, as for other `states` in other entities, for e.g `order.states`, it should represent the lifecycle state of the entity, but in this case, it represents product types.

>   - A product is not possibly both digital and physical, but the field is a JSON array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A product cannot be both digital and physical, but the field is a JSON array.
```

  - The rule conditions and product stream filters are tightly coupled to the legacy states (hard coded in both client-side and server-side), making it difficult to extend or modify their behavior. For e.g a third-party developer wanting to add a new product type, they would need to modify the existing rule conditions, product stream filters, product listing filters which is not ideal.

## Decision

### Deprecation of `product.states`:

- Deprecate the `product.states` field in the database in favor of a new `product.type` field that clearly indicates whether a product is `digital` or `physical`.
- Deprecate `order_line_item.states` in favor of `order_line_item.product_type` in a similar manner.
- Deprecate `LineItemProductStatesRule` in favor of `LineItemProductTypeRule`.
- Deprecate `StatesUpdater` service and its related dispatched events (`ProductStatesBeforeChangeEvent`, `ProductStatesChangedEvent`).
- Deprecate product stream filters and product listing filters that rely on `product.states`, guiding users to use the new `product.type` field instead.

> ### Introduce `product.type` field

Reviewer 2: Do i see it right that one product can always only have one type?

I see the benefits of that approach in terms of searchability and currently can't think of any concrete examples, or feature we are discussing right now where we have the case that would need to allow to combine the `types` -> so that's fine from my side, but we should make that point really explicit!

Author: > Do i see it right that one product can always only have one type?

Yes it is, I will rephrase it

> Product type field should have a clear definition: It represent the type of product, whether it's physical or digital or bundle or subscription etc, and it should be immutable once set.

Reviewer: I am not sure, if we should mention "subscription" in this ADR as an example at all. 

for me, it would be totally valid, if a physical, downloadable or bundle product could also be bought with a subscription

- Also add `order_line_item.product_type` and populate it when line items are converted from the cart; `LineItemTransformer` also reconstructs legacy states when needed.
- Introduce `LineItemProductTypeRule` for rule builder usage and deprecate the legacy `LineItemProductStatesRule`.
- Rules automatically pick up custom product types registered via the shared registry (@See `ProductTypeRegistry`), so PHP-based conditions stay consistent with storefront/admin filters.

#### Introduce a server-side `ProductTypeRegistry` 

- This registry help both core rules and plugins can register additional product types via the `shopware.product.type` service tag.

```php
class ProductTypeRegistry
{
    /**
     * @var array<string, AbstractProductType>
     */
    private array $types = [];

    public function addType(AbstractProductType $type): void

    public function getTypes(): array
```

The registry contains different `AbstractProductType` implementations, each defining:

```php
abstract class AbstractProductType
{
    abstract public function getType(): string;

>     public function getBehavior(): ProductTypeBehavior

Reviewer 2: i don't see the benefit of providing the behaviour on the product type

Can you explain that in more details? E.g. what are the specific behaviours you can control etc

Providing that only makes sense if we somehow can provide a more or less complete behaviours, and we you add new types you can do that by mixing and matching of existing behaviours

however so far i think it is way more likely that when you add a new typ you would need to add new behaviours as well, which would then lead to a core change again 🤔

Author: > Can you explain that in more details? E.g. what are the specific behaviours you can control etc

type that indicates the products can be exports, type that is shippable, downloadable, type that is hidden from admin product listing etc, it's important for some system that only certain type should be able to export or not, but think about it, I'd just remove the behavior and dispatch the event so we can filter them explicitly

## Consequences

### For the platform
- Querying by digital/physical products now becomes trivial (`product.type = 'digital'`), improving DAL and search performance and clarity.
- The core will migrate existing `product.states` to `product.type` and the same from `order_line_item.states` to `order_line_item.product_type` to preserve existing behavior.
- Rule conditions must be updated to reference `cartLineItemProductType`; existing rules referencing `cartLineItemProductStates` will continue to work until 6.8 but should be migrated.
- Similar to rule conditions, existing product stream filters must be updated to transist from `product.states` the new `product.type` field.
- We should warn on the UI when users use `states` field in product streams, rule conditions, product listing filters, guiding them to use to the new `type` field instead.

### For third-party developers

- You can now easily register new product types by implementing `AbstractProductType` and tagging their service with `shopware.product.type`.
- If you have existing code that relies on `product.states`, you should plan to migrate to the new `product.type` field.

> - Please pay attenition to different `product.type` and its behavior (`type.behavior`) not only in platform but for all registered types in the system when fetching or filtering products. Be specific to use `type` field if you want to be safe to not have issues which fetching product types that you are not aware of. For examples, a third-party developer may introduce a new product type `container`, if you're not specific in your queries, you may incur unexpected results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Please pay attention to different `product.type` and its behaviour (`type.behavior`) not only in platform but for all registered types in the system when fetching or filtering products. Be specific to use `type` field if you want to be safe to not have issues which fetching product types that you are not aware of. For examples, a third-party developer may introduce a new product type `container`, if you're not specific in your queries, you may incur unexpected results.
```

  - The rule conditions and product stream filters are tightly coupled to the legacy states (hard coded in both client-side and server-side), making it difficult to extend or modify their behavior. For e.g a third-party developer wanting to add a new product type, they would need to modify the existing rule conditions, product stream filters, product listing filters which is not ideal.

## Decision

### Deprecation of `product.states`:

- Deprecate the `product.states` field in the database in favor of a new `product.type` field that clearly indicates whether a product is `digital` or `physical`.
- Deprecate `order_line_item.states` in favor of `order_line_item.payload.product_type` in a similar manner.
- Deprecate `LineItemProductStatesRule` in favor of `LineItemProductTypeRule`.
- Deprecate `StatesUpdater` service and its related dispatched events (`ProductStatesBeforeChangeEvent`, `ProductStatesChangedEvent`).
- Deprecate product stream filters and product listing filters that rely on `product.states`, guiding users to use the new `product.type` field instead.

### Introduce `product.type` field

> Product type field should have a clear definition: It represent the type of product, whether it's physical or digital or bundle etc, and it should be immutable once set. A product can only have one type at a time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Product type field should have a clear definition: It represents the type of product, whether it's physical or digital or bundle etc, and it should be immutable once set. A product can only have one type at a time.
```

```php
class ProductTypeRegistry
{
    /**
     * @var array<string>
     */
    private array $types = [];

    public function addType(string $type): void

    public function getTypes(): array
```

- By default, the platform registers two types: `digital` and `physical`.

#### New admin API endpoint to fetch all registered product types

- Introduce a new admin api `GET /api/_action/product/types` to list all registered product types for use in admin UI for e.g product stream filters or Product listing filters

## Consequences

### For the platform
- Querying by digital/physical products now becomes trivial (`product.type = 'digital'`), improving DAL and search performance and clarity.
- The core will migrate existing `product.states` to `product.type` and the same from `order_line_item.states` to `order_line_item.payload.product_type` to preserve existing behavior.
- Rule conditions must be updated to reference `cartLineItemProductType`; existing rules referencing `cartLineItemProductStates` will continue to work until 6.8 but should be migrated.

> - Similar to rule conditions, existing product stream filters must be updated to transist from `product.states` the new `product.type` field.

Reviewer 3: note sure, but probably
```suggestion
- Similar to rule conditions, existing product stream filters must be updated to transition from `product.states` to the new `product.type` field.
```

## Decision

### Deprecation of `product.states`:

- Deprecate the `product.states` field in the database in favor of a new `product.type` field that clearly indicates whether a product is `digital` or `physical`.
- Deprecate `order_line_item.states` in favor of `order_line_item.payload.product_type` in a similar manner.
- Deprecate `LineItemProductStatesRule` in favor of `LineItemProductTypeRule`.
- Deprecate `StatesUpdater` service and its related dispatched events (`ProductStatesBeforeChangeEvent`, `ProductStatesChangedEvent`).
- Deprecate product stream filters and product listing filters that rely on `product.states`, guiding users to use the new `product.type` field instead.

### Introduce `product.type` field

Product type field should have a clear definition: It represent the type of product, whether it's physical or digital or bundle etc, and it should be immutable once set. A product can only have one type at a time.

In a more detailed manner, we will make the following changes:

> - Add a dedicated `product.type` column (values `physical`/`digital`) with DAL exposure, new entity constants, defaulting to `physical`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add a dedicated `product.type` column (possible values by default: `physical` or `digital`) with DAL exposure, new entity constants, defaulting to `physical`.
```

> - `product.type` is only written once after product save (@See `ProductTypeInitiator`) service. It means once a product is marked as `digital` or `physical`, it cannot be changed to another type, this also improves data integrity and not having to update the field on every save.

Reviewer: ProductTypeInitiator does not seem to exist :thinking:

> - `product.type` is only written once after product save (@See `ProductTypeInitiator`) service. It means once a product is marked as `digital` or `physical`, it cannot be changed to another type, this also improves data integrity and not having to update the field on every save.

Reviewer: > it cannot be changed to another type

currently this is not true. the field in the definition has no special flag, so it could simply be updated with the CRUD API :man_shrugging:

Author: Yeah that part was outdated, updated,

I want to introduce a new Immutable flag in a separated PR, do you think it would make sense? the field should only be set once and cannot be updated

Reviewer: we have a `WriteProtected` flag, maybe this is already sufficient?

Author: with WriteProtected flag, I cannot send the type when creating the product via admin api, its only protected based on scopes.

Reviewer: ah yes, right :thinking: I am thinking about other use cases and if it makes sense to have a field that can never be changed again :thinking:

Author: First one I can think of

<img width="758" height="731" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/205d3c56-a3dd-4b68-b06e-2ac3ef561a4f" />

Reviewer: how is it prevented in that case?

Author: It's only prevented on the UI

Reviewer: ok, then we should think about such a flag :+1: would you like to draft an ADR and POC?

Author: I will after this one is merged 👍🏽

Reviewer: we should make sure, that the product type is then not released without the new flag. otherwise it could be seen as break? :thinking:

Author: why it's a break 🤔

Reviewer: if you add a flag which prevents updating a field, then it is at least a behaviour break :slightly_smiling_face: 

so maybe we might need that flag first :thinking:

Author: Yeah but the field is not supposed to be updated by its nature right? I will try to have it soon but I don't think it will block this one 🤔

Author: Added the flag here https://github.com/shopware/shopware/pull/13957

- Also add `order_line_item.payload.product_type` and populate it when line items are converted from the cart; `LineItemTransformer` also reconstructs legacy states when needed.
- Introduce `LineItemProductTypeRule` for rule builder usage and deprecate the legacy `LineItemProductStatesRule`.
- Rules automatically pick up custom product types registered via the shared registry (@See `ProductTypeRegistry`), so PHP-based conditions stay consistent with storefront/admin filters.

#### Introduce a server-side `ProductTypeRegistry` 

> - This registry help both core rules and plugins can register additional product types via the parameter `%shopware.product.types%` as an array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This registry help both core rules and plugins can register additional product types via the parameter `%shopware.product.allowed_types%` as an array.
```
